---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Understanding Unix/Linux programming - 06 				# 标题 
subtitle:   Process and program 
date:       2020-07-25 				# 时间
author:     Li Ju 						# 作者
header-img: img/post-bg-2015.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
mathjax: true
tags:								#标签
    Linux
---
This article will introduce process: how to execute a program, how to create a new process, how to end a process
and what will happen after a process ends. Finally we will write a simple Shell program to execute program. 

#### Program and process 
A program is a series of executable binary instructions and related data stored in disk. Running a program 
basically means the computer will read the program data to memory and cpu will run instructions of the program 
one by one.

A process is a running entity of a program in memory, with its related data and processes will consume resourses.
Multiple processes can be run from one program. Or simple we can think program is static instructions and data, 
while process is dynamically running on computers. 

#### Know better about process
In Unix/Linux, ``ps`` can be used to list processes. More flags can be added like ``-l`` to list detailed 
information about processes, ``-a`` to list processes running by all terminals. Inside the information, ``UID``
stands the user who run the process, ``PID`` is the process id, ``S`` stands status, in which ``R`` means running
while ``S`` means sleeping, ``PRI`` and ``NI`` is the priority and niceness level of the process, ``SZ`` is the 
memory cost in RAM, and ``WCHAN`` is the reason why processes are sleeping. 

Besides user processes, other processes are run by the system and call be listed with ``ps -aux``, many of which
are not linked to a terminal, including klogd, syslogd to manage log of OS, cron, atd for scheduling and sshd, 
getty for other user logging in. 

Memory in Unix/Linux are splited into kernel space and user space. User processes are in user space memory and
like file system, process are assigned many memory pages for instructions and data. A scheduler will track all
processes and feed instructions to CPU. 

#### Shell 
In Unix/Linux, nearly everything we do is in Shell. Shell is actually a special program which can:
1. run programs: Shell is able to run other programs like ``ls``, ``grep`` and others, shell loads them into 
memory and run them. So shell can be seen as a program launcher as well. 

2. manage input and output: besides running other programs, shell is also able to redirect input and output
with \<, \> and |, to redirect stdin and stdout to other programs or files. 

3). be programmable: Shell is also able to be programmed with variables and flow control.  

#### Useful functions 
##### ``execvp``
``execvp`` is a function used to run another program in a process. ``execvp`` needs to receive two arguments, 
the first one is a char pointer (string) indicating the program to be run, and the second on is a pointer
of char pointer (list of strings) indicating the program arguments. One point to be noticed is that the last
element of second array should be ``NULL`` indicating the end of arguments. 

``execvp`` will replace all code left with program run, in another word, the process itself will be replaced with
the process started by ``execvp``. 

##### ``fork``
``fork`` is a function used to create a new process copying itself exactly. The kernel will allocate new memory
blocks and PCB for the process, copy original process data to new one, add the new process to running process
group. 

The return value of the new process will be its own process id. Actually this is always used to distinguish
original process and new child process. Also the parent process id of the new process is the original process id.

##### ``wait``
Before talking more about ``wait``, let's know a bit more about what will happen if a process is going to end.
Generally a process is ended by two reasons: 1). the process itself called ``exit()`` or returned from its
own main function, 2). the process is killed by signals. For both cases, all resources of child process will be
freed but only process id and some small-sized data structures will be kept. Then the child process will send a 
signal SIGCHLD to its parent process to notify that itself has been terminated. After the signal been handled by 
its parent process, the child process can be freed entirely, otherwise the child process will be zombie process. 
Accumulation of zombie processes will not use much resources but too many zombie processes might used up all
possible process id address, so that the OS cannot create new processes. 

``wait`` is a function used by parent process to wait for its child process termination. It has only one
argument: an address of an integer and the child process will store its termination information to the integer. 
The interger is consisted of 16 bits: first 8 bits is the exit value/return value of the child process, and the
9th bit is used to indicate whether core dumped or not, and the last 7 bits are used to store the signal number
that kills the child process. 

##### ``exit`` and ``_exit``
Both functions ``exit`` and ``_exit`` can be used to terminated a process, however there are some little
differences. ``exit`` is a function in standard C library while ``_exit`` is a system call in Unix/Linux. 
``exit`` will flush all buffered data in stream to files, and call all functions registered in ``atexit``, 
then finally it will call ``_exit`` to terminate the process. However, ``_exit`` simply called kernel to end
the process directly. 

Normally we should use ``exit`` to terminate our process, but in the case that we called ``daemon`` to run the
process background, we can simply call ``_exit`` to terminate current process. 

#### Build your own Shell 
To build your own shell, we should first know the work flow of the shell: 

The shell keeps running and waits for commands to start a program, after the process running, the shell should
wait there till the end of the program and print the exit status of the process. Then the shell keeps running
and waiting for commands again. Also, when process running, signals from keyboard should be reacted by the
running process rather than shell itself, and after running, the shell should react to keyboard signals itself. 

Here is the logic of shell program: 
<br>1. read chars from keyboard till the character ``Enter``, and transform the input into a list of 
arguments (strings); 
<br>2. ``fork`` itself, and the parent process should ignore signals and the child process start to execute 
program with function ``execvp``; 
<br>3. parent process ``wait`` for the child process passing an integer address into the function
<br>4. after the termination of the child process, the parent process unmask the returned status and print them
on the screen, and start to react to signals; 
<br>5. go to step 1. 

The source code can be found
[here](https://github.com/Li-Ju666/Understanding-UNIX-LINUX-Programming/tree/master/chap8). 
