---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Understanding Unix/Linux programming - 01 				# 标题 
subtitle:   Overview for system programming
date:       2020-07-23 				# 时间
author:     Li Ju 						# 作者
header-img: img/post-bg-2015.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
mathjax: true
tags:								#标签
    Linux
---
This article will make an overview for Unix/Linux system programming and implement a simple program `more`
to preview files in C. 

#### What is operating system
Operating system (also known as kernel) is a special software to manage hardware resources and to offer services 
for applications. 

If we look down towards hardware from OS, OS handles a series of resources including CPU, RAM, network and other 
devices. To manage them better, some built-in functions are required like process management, disk management and memory
management. If we look up to application level, OS is able to offer many services like disk access, CPU use, 
and memory allocation. In a word, OS is an intermediate software connecting user applications and hardware: every
access to hardware from user applications should be permitted and scheduled by OS. 

#### Unix/Linux programming
Services offered by OS are a series of API functions, or called system calls, together with related data 
structures. When we are talking about Unix/Linux programming, basically we are talking about "programming with
Unix/Linux APIs": using system kernel calls to build applications in Unix/Linux. 

To have a better understanding of how this actually works, a simple program named ``more`` will be implemented.

The program should have following functions: 
1. ``more input_file``: it should be able to preview several lines of the file and wait there for further instructions. 
2. if ``Enter`` is pressed, it should print one more line, and if ``space`` is pressed, it should print
one more page. After these it should be waiting there again, unless there are no more content remaining to be displayed. 
3. The program should be able to accept text from shell pipeline and do exactly the same actions as we described above. 

##### Before implementation: 
>1. As we know, everything in Linux are files, so are ``stdin``, ``stdout`` and ``stderr``. They are three built-in
> file descriptors connecting with ``/dev/stdin``, ``/dev/stdout`` and ``/dev/stderr``. They are created when a shell
> starts, and they are represented by ``0``, ``1`` and ``2``, respectively. Ty are used to convey data stream. As 
> their names indicate, ``stdin`` is for input data stream, ``stdout`` is for output data stream and ``stderr`` is for 
> error information. Data in ``stdin`` is from keyboard, and data from ``stdout`` and ``stderr`` will be passed to 
> screen by default.
> <br>
> <br>However things are not alwaike this: redirect is doable. There are several common situations: 
> <br>
> <br>1). Data in ``stdout`` can be redirected to another file by ``>``. For example, ``ls /bin > ./result.txt``: non-error
> result of ``ls /bin`` is stored in ``stdout`` and will be printed on screen by default, however with ``>`` these data 
> will be redirected to ``./result.txt`` (**Notice**: this will not redirected data in ``stderr``). 
> <br>
> <br>2). Data in ``stderr`` can be redirected to another file explicitly as well by ``[command] 2>./error.txt``: non-error
> result of ``[command]`` will be stored in ``stdout`` while error information will be stored in ``stderr``. 
> ``2>./error.txt`` will redirect all error data in ``stderr`` to ``./error.txt`` and other non-error results will be
> stilled printed on screen. (**Notice**: if one want to drop data in ``stderr`` or ``stdout``, they can be redirected 
> to ``/dev/null``). 
> <br>
> <br>3). Though be default all data in ``stdin`` are from keyboard input, however in shell pipeline
> ``[command_1] || [command_2]``, non-error results of ``[command_1]`` will be redirected from ``stdout`` to ``stdin``
> automatically and ``[command_2]`` is actually dealing with data from ``stdout`` (**Notics**: data in ``stderr`` will
> not be redirected: this is why those failed commands cannot be dealt with by shell pipeline).  
> 
>2. ``/dev/tty``: tty is a file accepting input from keyboard. As we know, by default data in ``/dev/tty`` will be 
> directed to ``stdin`` but this is not always so: when using shell pipeline. This suggests us that for situations when
> we need input from keyboard, we should access ``dev/tty`` rather than ``stdin``, which has been possibly redirected! 
>
>3. When opening files, we could use ``open()`` or ``fopen()``, what's the difference? 
> <br>
> <br>``int open()`` is a Unix/Linux system call while ``FILE* fopen()`` is a higher level function offered by C 
> standard library. ``fopen()`` is a wrapping of ``open()``: ``fopen()`` buffers a certain size of opened file
> so that further file read will do less system calls (which is expensive): just need to read data from its buffer 
> in memory. Generally it is better to use ``fopen()``, which takes a bit more memory but less time. 
>
>4. The workflow of ``more`` is very simple: open file, read to-be-printed data from file and wait for input, according
> to different input, read different sizes of data to buffer and print them till the end of file. 
> <br>
> <br>This sounds pretty easy, but several points we need to notice: 
> <br>1). we need to check the number of inputs: if it is 0, we need to handle data from ``stdin``, otherwise we should
> open normal files; 
> <br>
> <br>2). We should get input from ``/dev/tty`` rather than ``stdin``, in case that we are handling data from ``stdin``
> already. 


#### Implementation
The implementation code for ``more`` is 
[here](https://github.com/Li-Ju666/Understanding-UNIX-LINUX-Programming/blob/master/chap1/my_more02.c). 