---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Understanding Unix/Linux programming - 03 				# 标题 
subtitle:   Files and Directories
date:       2020-07-23 				# 时间
author:     Li Ju 						# 作者
header-img: img/post-bg-2015.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
mathjax: true
tags:								#标签
    Linux
---
Previous article has explained some I/O operations on regular files. For this article, more properties about file
will be introduced: different types of file, how to get attributes of files and how to modify them. Moreover we will
explore how to operate directory files and finally implement ``ls`` program to list detailed information of a directory.

#### File types
We have known that regular files can be open, read, write and close with system calls straightly. However for Unix/Linux
system, everything is file, which means not all files are like regular files. There are 7 commonly used types of file: 
<br>1). Regular file: including both binary files and text files
<br>2). Directory file: a file that contains a list of names of other files and pointers to information of these files
<br>3).4). ...
<br>5). FIFO: a type of file used for inter-process communication
<br>6). Socket: a type of files used for inter-net communication
<br>7). Symbolic link: a type of file that points to another file, like shortcut in Windows. 
In this article, directory file will be centered. 

#### File properties
If we use command ``ls -l`` to list items of a directory, we will find for each file, a series of properties are 
attached. These properties are stored in a special data structure named ``Inodes`` and but not in the file itself. 
We can obtain their properties with a system call ``stat()``, which will copy all properties into a data structure 
``struct stat``

In ``struct stat``, several important attributes are listed while others can be easily understood if looking up manual
page: 
<br>1). ``st_mode``: an attribute describing type and permission of the file, including permissions for owner, group 
and others. 
<br>2). ``st_uid``: id of owner of the file. If we want to know the user name of the user id, a system call 
``getpwuid()`` is able to do so. 
<br>3). ``st_gid``: group id of the file. If we want to know the group name of the group id, a system call 
``getgrgid()`` can be used. 

#### More about ``st_mode``
``st_mode`` is an attribute of ``struct stat`` consisting of 16 bits, 4 of which stands for the type of file, 9 of
which indicates access permission of file and 4 of which stands for  permissions: ``setuid``, ``setgid`` and 
``sticky`` bits. 
 
The ``mode`` is specified as the bitwise OR of the constant. For all types and permissions, they can be checked with 
macros defined in ``sys.types.h`` and ``sys/stat.h`` easily. 

Specially for ``setuid``, if it is on, it stands that the one who is running the file is regarded as the owner of the
file. For ``setgid`` it is similar, if it is on the one who is running the file is regarded as a user from the group
of the file. For ``sticky`` bit, it is rarely used in modern computers. 

For permissions, all permission are divided into 3 parts: owner permission, group permission and other permission. 
For each part, read, write and execute permission can be added, represented by 4, 2, 1, respectively. And these
numbers can be added part-wise to represent multiple permissions, like 7(4+2+1)7(4+2+1)7(4+2+1) can represented
the file can be read, written and executed by owener, group and all others. 734 means the file can be read, written 
and executed by the owner, read and write by the group, and executed by others. One can specify a file's permission
when creating a file using ``creat()``, or change their permission using ``chmod()``. 

Also a system call ``umask()`` should be understood. It is a function to "remove" default permissions. Like if we 
set ``umask(022)``, all files created will not have write permissions for group and others, because they are 
``masked`` by the function. 

#### Implementation
Finally if we want to implement our own ``ls`` program, following steps should be followed: 
1. open the directory file of given directory with ``opendir()``
2. read a record from the directory file, a file name in the directory, and merge the directory path and file
name together to get the complete path of the file; 
3. Read the detailed information of the file using ``stat()`` system call; 
4. print all the information out, after converting them into readable formation using ``ctime()``, ``getpwuid``, 
``getgrgid`` and macros in ``sys/types.h`` and ``sys/stat.h``; 
5. go to step 2 till the end of the directory file; 
6. close directory file. 

The source code can be found
[here](https://github.com/Li-Ju666/Understanding-UNIX-LINUX-Programming/tree/master/chap3). 
