---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Understanding Unix/Linux programming - 02 				# 标题 
subtitle:   File operation
date:       2020-07-23 				# 时间
author:     Li Ju 						# 作者
header-img: img/post-bg-2015.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
mathjax: true
tags:								#标签
    Linux
---
This article will explain the concept of file descriptor and several system calls about files, including 
``open()``, ``read()``, ``write()``, ``lseek()`` and ``close()``. Also user space buffer and kernel buffer will 
be introduced. Common-used error detection and handling will be explained as well. Practically three program 
``who``, ``copy`` and ``logout`` will be implemented. 

#### What is file descriptor
We all know that everything in Unix/Linux are files: that is to say, we need to read/modify files, wh are services 
OS offers. OS is able to create a file descriptor connecting user process and a specific file, so that user can 
read/write on the file and close the channel (file descriptor). 

``open()`` is able to create and return a file descriptor (which is actually represented by an integerThen one can
``read()`` and ``write()`` the file with the file descriptor. ``lseek()`` is able to modify the position of reading and
writing. And ``close()`` is able to close the file descriptor. Detailed information about options, modes and return 
values of these functions can be easily got with ``man`` command. 

#### Buffer
Kernel buffer: 
<br>Generally files are stored on disk, so every read and write operation on file should involve an I/O operation, which
is extremely slow, comparing with CPU instructions. So in system kernel of Unix/Linux, when creating file descriptor, 
a certain size of file parts will be buffered in the kernel memory space. Every time a system call ``read()``
or``write()`` is done, the system only need to modify content in the buffer rather than I/O operation. The buffer will 
be synchronized with disk periodically or when required data are not in buffer. This is what we called kernel buffer. 

User space buffer: 
<br>Though we have already known that kernel has already kept a buffer in memory, however to use these buffer, system
calls are required. System calls are costly because of context switching so it would be better to do less system calls. 
With the idea of kernel buffer, we could keep a buffer in user space: the basic idea is similar but keep them in user
space to reduce system calls and update them regularly using system calls. 

If you have read my [previous article](https://li-ju666.github.io/2020/07/23/Unix-Linux-01/), you will have already
known the differences between ``fopen()`` and ``open()``. Actually this is a perfect example for kernel buffer and user
space kernel. The series of C standard library functions ``fopen()``, ``fclose()``, ``fread()`` and related 
struct ``FILE`` is a higher level wrapping for system calls with user space buffer. 

It might be problematic that the user space buffer has not written into kernel when the system dumped, which means the
modifications will be discarded. To force user space buffer are stored in kernel buffer, ``fflush()`` can be used. 
Another problem is modification might still be there if kernel buffer has not been stored in disk. Again a system
call ``syncfs()`` can be used to force kernel to do this. 


#### Error of system call
When a system call did not normally finished (error occurs), generally -1 will be returned. To check exactly what error
occurs, a global variable ``errno``  indicates this. Before using this variable, it should be declared as 
``extern int error`` and header file ``errno.h`` should be included, in which a series of macro are defined to present
different types of error. 

For different types of error, we might need different handling. ``errno`` can be used to do if statements to create
branches for different handling. 

To print error information, ``perror("[Custimized]")`` can be used. The system error message will follow your customized
string. This error message is redirected to ``tty`` via ``stderr`` rather than ``stdout``, so it cannot be redirected 
with ``>``. 

#### Implementation for ``who``
If we have known knowledge above, it is simple to create your own program ``who``: just need to ``man`` how login 
information are stored with ``struct utmp`` in ``UTMP_FILE``, a macro defined in ``utmp.h`` indicating the file path
of login information file. Read them in your buffer and print them out one by one. 

To get a better performance, you could keep your own user space buffer for the file descriptor, update the buffer when
the access exceed the buffer. Or in a simpler way you could just use C standard function ``fopen()`` to do so. 

#### Implementation for ``logout``
To logout from a system, all you need to to is to find the target record in ``UTMP_FILE`` and update its type into 
``DEAD_PROCESS``. So we need to read records with who one by one and find the target one. Then ``lseek()`` can be used
to locate current pointer position to the head of target record and update the attribute. 

#### Implementation for ``copy A B``
1. ``open()`` target file A and B
2. ``read()`` content of certain size in A to buffer
3. ``write()`` buffer to file B
4. goto 2 till the end of file. 
5. ``close()`` A and B

#### Implementation code
The implementation code of ``copy``, ``who`` and ``logout`` are 
[here](https://github.com/Li-Ju666/Understanding-UNIX-LINUX-Programming/tree/master/chap2). 