---
layout:     post   				    # 使用的布局（不需要改）
title:      Understanding Unix/Linux programming - 05 				# 标题 
subtitle:   Device files 
date:       2020-07-25 				# 时间
author:     Li Ju 						# 作者
header-img: img/post-bg-2015.jpg 	#这篇文章标题背景图片
catalog: true 						# 是否归档
mathjax: true
tags:								#标签
    Linux
---
Previous article has explained how file hierachy structure are constructed on physical disks and we have known
how to open read and write files. We will go further to talk about file descriptors properties about files, 
rather than simply reading and writing. 

#### File descriptor properties 
When a file descriptor is created, an integer will be returned indicating the "channel" between the process and
the file. Actually the integer is just an index of the channel, in which many properties can be defined. 

For regular files, we know that when opening files, some arguments like ``O_RDONLY`` can be specified. Actually
they are file descriptor properties and are attached to the file descriptor. They are also arguments for
functions like ``open()`` for the regular file descriptor. 

``
process
   |   
   | --->file descriptor(index + properties) ---> operations ---> hardware
   |
 files (regular, devices...)
``

#### Regular file descriptor properties
For regular file descriptors, there are 2 ways to modify their properties: we can specify arguments when
``open(file_name, arguments)`` files, or we can use ``fcntl(fd, F_GETFL)`` to get the setting (which is 
actually an integer), modify settings with bitwise or operation together with macros defined in ``fcntl.h`` 
and set them back to file descriptors with ``fcntl(fd, FSETFL, new_int)``. 

Besided common used ``O_RDONLY``, ``O_WRONLY``, and other read/write access mode, two more propeties should
be know, ``O_SYNC`` and ``O_APPEND``. The first one means when writing files, the function will return only
if the file has been synchronzed with disk (not buffered in kernel space) to make sure file has been saved in
disk. The second one means when multiple processes are writing on a same file, all data will be appended at
the tail of the file one by one and no part will be overwrited (actually this is done by regarding lseek and
write as an atomic operation). 

#### Terminal I/O
In Unix/Linux, tty (terminal) is a device file, combining all input from keyboard and output to screen. 
It is a byte-by-byte interface to and from buffered IO. If one read from tty, he will get characters input
from keyboard and if writes to tty, characters will be printed on screen. 

But tty file does not simply read from keyboard and print data of itself to screen directly. 
Actually a driver program is required. Data from keyboard will be fed into the driver program, after some
operations, the output data will be written in tty file. When data are read from tty file, they will be fed
to the driver program as well, and finally the output of driver program will be printed on the screen. 

Different from tty, stdin, stdout and stderr are not devices files but **file descriptors**. Generally they are
pointing to tty, but as we talked before, they can point to other files as well, also known as redirecting. 

#### tty file descriptor properties
We have known that a driver program of tty is there, so we can modify how they handle the data as well: 
they can be modified by tty file descriptor properties. In Unix/Linux, a data structure named ``termios`` is
defined in the kernel and in ``termios``, 4 types of modes, control characters, input and output speed. 
Modes include input modes, output models, local modes and control modes and they can be modified with macros
in ``termios.h``. 

If we want to modify them, system calls ``tcgetattr()`` can be used to save properties into a predefined
data structre. After modification with bitwise or, the ``struct termios`` can be set back to the file descriptor
by ``tcsetattr()``. 

Because terminal is essential for operating system, so the driver of terminal is part of operating system
kernel. For other devices, driver program and data structure can be defined by users. 

#### Other device file descritor properties 
For other devices, another system call ``ioctl()`` can be used to get properties of the file descriptor. 

#### Implementation of program to check and modify stdin properties
The source code can be found
[here](https://github.com/Li-Ju666/Understanding-UNIX-LINUX-Programming/tree/master/chap5). 
